.. _MSP430:

======
MSP430
======

The MSP430 is a 16-bit microcontroller from Texas Instruments. The
Amforth implementation is based on code from Camelforth by Brad
Rodriguez. This code is heavily modified and completely merged
with the AVR code from the initial Amforth code base.

This merge affects all higher order word like the interpreter
itself. Most low-level stuff remained unchanged however. E.g. the
inner interpreter is completely unchanged thus almost all
assembly words work as before. To make room in the 8KB sized
code segment, many words were removed. Some of them reappear
as loadable forth source however. Some other like :command:`,jmp`
are gone, since they make no real sense within amforth.

.. _msp430_register_mappings:

CPU Register Mapping
--------------------

Standard Use
............

+------------------------------+--------------------+
| Forth Register               | MSP430 Register    |
+==============================+====================+
| W: Working Register          | R6                 |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| IP: Instruction Pointer      | R5                 |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| RSP: Return Stack Pointer    | SP (HW Stack)      |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| PSP: Parameter Stack Pointer | R4                 |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| UP: User Pointer             | R14                |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| TOS: Top Of Stack            | R7                 |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| X: temporary register        | R10                |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| Loop Index                   | R8                 |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| Loop Limit                   | R9                 |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| Y: temporary register        | R11                |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| Q: temporary register        | R12                |
+------------------------------+--------------------+

The remaining registers are used by the CPU itself (R0-R3).

Extended Forth VM Register Mapping
..................................

+------------------------------+--------------------+
| Forth Register               | MSP430 Register(s) |
+==============================+====================+
| A: Index and Scratch Register| R15                |
+------------------------------+--------------------+
| B: Index and Scratch Register| R13                |
+------------------------------+--------------------+

Core System
-----------

Threading Model
...............

AmForth implements the classic indirect threaded variant of
forth. The registers and their mappings are shown in table
:ref:`msp430_register_mappings`.

Inner Interpreter
.................

For the indirect threading model an inner interpreter is
needed. On the MSP 430 it almost the same as on the AVR8
platform. There are two major differences.

* the NEXT routine is compiled into each word, there is no
  central NEXT code.
* It does not support interrupts.


Memory Allocation
-----------------

The ANS 94 standard defines three major data regions: name space,
code space and data space. The MSP430 system architecture
uses three memory types too: Flash, RAM and Info Flash. These three
memory types share a common address space. The Info Flash is copied
to a pre-defined RAM region, that can be written back using :command:`SAVE`.
This write back is *not* performed automatically. That is a major difference
to the EEPROM based configuration area in the AVR8.

User Area
---------

The User Area is a special RAM storage area. It
contains the USER variables and the User deferred
definitions. Access is based upon the value of the
user pointer UP. It can be changed with the word
:command:`UP!` and read with :command:`UP@`
. The UP itself is stored in a register pair.

The size of the user area is determined by the size 
the system itself uses plus a configurable number at
compile time. For self defined tasks this user supplied 
number can be changed for task local variables.

The first USER area is located at the first data address
(usually RAMSTART).

.. _msp430_userarea:

+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Address offset (bytes)   | Purpose                     |
+==========================+=============================+
| 0                        | Multitasker Status          |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 2                        | Multitasker Follower        |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 4                        | RP0                         |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 6                        | SP0                         |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 8                        | SP (used by multitasker)    |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 10                       | HANDLER (exception handling)|
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 12                       | BASE (number conversion)    |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 14                       | EMIT (deferred)             |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 16                       | EMIT? (deferred)            |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 18                       | KEY (deferred)              |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 20                       | KEY? (deferred)             |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 22                       | SOURCE (deferred)           |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 24                       | >IN                         |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 26                       | REFILL (deferred)           |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+

The User Area is used to provide task local
information. Without an active multitasker it
contains the starting values for the stackpointers,
the deferred words for terminal IO, the BASE
variable and the exception handler.

The multitasker uses the first 2 cells to store the
status and the link to the next entry in the task
list. In that situation the user area is/can be seen
as the task control block.

Dictionary Management
---------------------

The dictionary has all words and code. It is located in the flash
region. The memory is managed with the :command:`dp` dictionary
pointer. It is a configuration RAM variable.

.. code-block:: forth

   \ ( n -- )
   : , dp !i dp 1 +! ;


Wordlists too use the configuration RAM. The wordlist identifier is 
the address of a RAM cell, that contains the link to the first word
in the list.

.. code-block:: forth

   : wordlist ( -- wid )
       infodp @ 0 over !
       dup cell+ infodp !e ;


The :command:`header` command starts a new dictionary entry. It creates
the same layout as the AVR8 but differs in the way, the header is built. 

.. code-block:: forth

   : header ( addr len wid -- NT )
     @ ,      \ link field
     $ff c,   \ flag field
     ihere >r \ Name Token NT
     s,       \ copy the string from RAM to flash
     r>       \ 
   ;

All higher level structures are identical.


Memories
--------

Flash
.....

Flash contains the dictionary. The actual placement depends on the device type but
usually the amforth core system is at the higher addresses. User specific words start
at flash start.

Reqriting flash pages is only possible if enough RAM ressources are available to buffer
a whole page. Since a page is usually 512 bytes in size, the smaller device types like
the G2553 cannot rewrite flash cells.

Info Flash
..........

A 128 bytes segment called INFO D is used for configuration data. This block is copied 
to RAM at startup. Any changes to the data are applied to this RAM copy. Only an explicit
command :command:`SAVE` writes the configuration settings back to the info flash.

RAM
...

RAM is used for the info flash copy, data like the USER area, buffers such as the terminal
input buffer and the acutal user data. Technically it would be possible to place the 
dictionary here too since nothing in the MSP430 architecture prevents this. 

FRAM
.....

Some devices use FRAM instead of flash memory. While not strictly necessary, they too
require the :command:`save` command to make all changes to the dictionary permanent.
This memory supports the :command:`create` command.
